---
title: "DNSSEC Key Restore"
category: info

docname: draft-fobser-dnsop-dnssec-keyrestore-latest
submissiontype: IETF  # also: "independent", "editorial", "IAB", or "IRTF"
number:
date:
consensus: true
v: 3
area: "Operations and Management"
workgroup: "Domain Name System Operations"
keyword:
 - DNSSEC
 - disaster recovery
 - backup and restore
#venue:
#  group: WG
#  type: Working Group
#  mail: WG@example.com
#  arch: https://example.com/WG
#  github: USER/REPO
#  latest: https://example.com/LATEST

author:
 -
    fullname: Florian Obser
    organization: RIPE NCC
    email: fobser@ripe.net
 -
    fullname: Martin Pels
    organization: RIPE NCC
    email: mpels@ripe.net

normative:
  RFC9364:
informative:
  RFC6781:
  RFC7583:
  RFC9499:
  RFC9824:
  Shamir:
    title: How to Share a Secret
    author:
     -
        fullname: Adi Shamir
    seriesinfo:
      "ACM Press": "Communications of the ACM, Vol. 22, No. 11, pp. 612-613"
      DOI: 10.1145/359168.359176
    date: 1979-11

--- abstract

This document describes the issues surrounding the handling of DNSSEC
private keys in a DNSSEC signer. It presents operational guidance in
case a DNSSEC private key becoming inoperable.

--- middle

# Introduction

DNSSEC {{RFC9364}} uses public key cryptography to provide origin
authentication of DNS data. From an operational point of view, it is
critically important to keep the private key secret under all
circumstances.

The private key is typically kept secret by using Hardware Security
Modules (HSMs). HSMs are designed to perform cryptographic operations
such as creating keys and signing messages without disclosing the
private key.

Alternatively the DNSSEC signer is an appliance or commodity server
hardware and operational policy stipulates that the private key must
not leave the signer.

Operationally this is a problem because only a single key exists. The
key could become inoperable at any point due to hardware failure,
natural disaster, operator error, or malicious action.

It is difficult to create backups of the private key. After all, the
system is designed to prevent backups. A compromise is usually reached
by using a secret sharing scheme, e.g. {{Shamir}}. The private key is
split into n pieces inside of the HSM, which are then distributed to
key share holders. In case the private key becomes inoperable, m out
of the n key share holders need to come together to restore the secret
key.

A key sharing scheme creates its own operational issues though. When
more than n-m key shares become unavailable, a restore cannot be
performed because not enough key shares are available. This is
particularly challenging in small to medium sized teams.

On the other hand, a DNSSEC signed zones can be considered public data
with its integrity protected by signatures. The signed zones can be
added to the normal, established backup procedures.

# Conventions and Definitions

{::boilerplate bcp14-tagged}

This document uses DNS terminology from {{RFC9499}}.

DNSSEC key states and timeline related abbreviations are defined in
{{RFC7583}}.

Inoperable (private key):
: The private part of a DNSKEY that appears in the chain of trust of
  the zone that can no longer be used for signing. Reasons include
  hardware failure, natural disaster, operator error, or malicious
  action. A compromised key is not an inoperable private key since it
  can still be used for signing.

Operable (private key):
: The opposite of an inoperable private key. A key that can be used
  for signing.

# Scope

Online signing, such as {{RFC9824}}, is out of scope since the
operational challenges are different than described in the
introduction.

The root zone is out of scope since the distribution of a new trust
anchor takes considerably longer than the RRSIG lifetime.

Algorithm Rollovers {{RFC6781}} section 4.1.4 are out of scope as
well. They are already complicated enough and trying to recover from
an inoperable DNSSEC private key while an algorithm rollover is being
performed is unlikely to be successful. Since the rollover only takes
a short time, it might be advisable to forgo the strict requirement of
keeping the private key secret at all costs. The algorithm rollover
could be performed with commodity hardware that allows regular backups
that are easy to handle. Once the algorithm rollover is done, a new Key
Signing Key (KSK) and Zone Signing Key (ZSK) can be generated by a HSM
or appliance and a normal KSK/ZSK roll to that new key can be
performed.

Normal key rollovers are in scope, since they do not pose extra
challenges. The procedures described in this document effectively
cancel a potentially ongoing key rollover and perform a new one.

# DNSSEC Key Restore

In case of a catastrophe where the DNSSEC private key becomes
inoperable and no functioning backups of the private key are
available, it is desirable to recover from this situation with DNS
resolution continuing to work for the effected zone(s) while
performing DNSSEC key restore operations.

This is possible because the moment the DNSSEC private key becomes
inoperable, the zone is still correctly signed and served by the
authoritative name servers. Signatures typically have a lifetime of
many days. That means that the operator has a lot of time to recover
from this situation without the zone becoming bogus and no longer
validating. Hasty and inappropriate action on the other hand lead to
outages.

While the DNSSEC private key cannot be restored because no functioning
backups exist, the function of the zone can be restored.

The restore process uses slightly modified key rollover procedures
from {{RFC7583}}.

During the restore process, the signing software operates on a
pre-signed zone. That is, the zone already contains a DNSKEY RRset and
RRSIG RRsets. The signing software MUST NOT remove remove those
DNSKEYs and RRSIGs until instructed to do so. The signing software
might try to remove those DNSKEYs and RRSIGs because the private key
is not present, the operator MUST prevent this, otherwise the zone
will become bogus.

The exact process depends on which key(s) are inoperable and if the
zone is signed with a split KSK / ZSK key pair or a Combined Signing
Key (CSK).

## KSK / ZSK split, KSK operable, ZSK inoperable

Since the old ZSK is inoperable, it cannot be used to create new
RRSIGs. Therefore the zone cannot be changed and only the Pre-Publication
method can be used. See {{RFC7583}} section 2.1.

Section 3.2.1 of {{RFC7583}} documents the timeline for this
method.

The new ZSK is added to the DNSKEY RRset at its publication time
(Tpub).

The inoperable ZSK and all RRSIGs it created MUST remain in the zone.

The new ZSK must be published long enough to guarantee that any cached
DNSKEY RRset contains the new ZSK. This interval is the publication
interval (Ipub), given by

    Ipub = Dprp + TTLkey

Dprp is the propagation delay, the time it takes for changes to
propagate to all authoritative nameserver instances. TTLkey is the TTL
of the DNSKEY RRset.

The new ZSK can be used when it becomes ready at Trdy:

    Trdy = Tpub + Ipub.

At this point the zone can be changed again. The zone is signed with
the new ZSK and RRSIGs from the inoperable ZSK can be removed. The
inoperable ZSK MUST be retained in the DNSKEY RRset.

The inoperable ZSK can be removed after the retire interval (Iret),
given by:

    Iret = Dsgn + Dprp + TTLsig

Dsgn is the delay needed to ensure that all existing RRsets are signed
with the new ZSK, Dprp is the propagation delay and TTLsig is the
maximum TTL of all RRSIG records.

Theoretically the Double-Signature method could be used as well, but
the zone can only be changed after the retire interval, which is at
least as long as the publication interval of the Pre-Publication
method. The Double-Signature retire interval is given by:

    Iret = Dsgn + Dprp + max(TTLkey, TTLsig)

## KSK / ZSK split, KSK inoperable

Since the old KSK is inoperable, the DNSKEY RRset cannot be
changed. Therefore, only the Double-DS method can be used. See
{{RFC7583}} section 2.2.

Section 3.3.2 of {{RFC7583}} documents the timeline for this
method.

If the ZSK is inoperable as well, it MUST NOT be restored yet.

A new DS record is added to the DS RRset in the parent zone, this is
the submission time, Tsbm.

After the registration delay, Dreg, the DS record is published in the
parent zone. This is the publication time (Tpub), give by:

    Tpub = Tsbm + Dreg.

The DS record must be published long enough to guarantee that any
cached DS RRset contains the new DS record. This is the parent
publication interval (IpubP) given by

    IpubP = DprpP + TTLds

DprpP is the propagation delay of the parent zone, i.e. the time it
takes for changes to propagate to all authoritative servers of the
parent zone. TTLds is the TTL of the DS RRset at the parent.

The new KSK can be used when it becomes ready at Trdy:

    Trdy = Tpub + IpubP

At this point the new KSK can be added to the DNSKEY RRset and used to
generate the DNSKEY RRsig. The old, inoperable KSK can be removed. The
ZSK MUST remain in the DNSKEY RRset.

If the ZSK is inoperable, the ZSK signing function can be now be
restored using the procedure in the previous section.

To ensure that no caches have DNSKEY RRset with the old KSK, the old
DS record MUST remain in the parent zone for the duration of the
retire interval (Iret), given by:

    Iret = DprpC + TTLkey

DprpC is the child propagation delay, the time it takes for changes to
propagate to all authoritative nameserver instances of the child
zone. TTLkey is the TTL of the DNSKEY RRset.

The old DS record can be removed from the parent zone at the dead time
(Tdea), given by:

    Tdea = Trdy + Iret

## CSK inoperable

Since the old CSK is inoperable, the DNSKEY RRset cannot be
changed. Therefore, only the Double-DS method can be used. See
{{RFC7583}} section 2.2.

Section 3.3.2 of {{RFC7583}} documents the timeline for this method.

Since the CSK is also used to sign the zone, the timing of the
Double-DS method need to be adjusted.

The inoperable CSK and all RRSIGs it created MUST remain in the zone.

A new DS record is added to the DS RRset in the parent zone, this is
the submission time, Tsbm.

After the registration delay, Dreg, the DS record is published in the
parent zone. This is the publication time (Tpub), give by:

    Tpub = Tsbm + Dreg.

The DS record must be published long enough to guarantee that any
cached DS RRset contains the new DS record. This is the parent
publication interval (IpubP) given by

    IpubP = DprpP + TTLds

DprpP is the propagation delay of the parent zone, i.e. the time it
takes for changes to propagate to all authoritative servers of the
parent zone. TTLds is the TTL of the DS RRset at the parent.

The new CSK can be used when it becomes ready at Trdy:

    Trdy = Tpub + IpubP

At this point the new CSK can be added to the DNSKEY RRset and used to
generate the DNSKEY RRsig. The old, inoperable CSK MUST remain in the
DNSKEY RRset. The new CSK can be used to generate the RRsigs for the
rest of the zone. The RRSIGs generated by the inoperable CSK MUST
remain in the zone.

To ensure that no caches have DNSKEY RRset with the old CSK, the old
DS record MUST remain in the parent zone for the duration of the
retire interval (Iret), given by:

    Iret = Dsgn + DprpC + max(TTLkey, TTLsig)

Dsgn is the delay needed to ensure that all existing RRsets are signed
with the new CSK. DprpC is the child propagation delay, the time it
takes for changes to propagate to all authoritative nameserver
instances of the child zone. TTLkey is the TTL of the DNSKEY RRset and
TTLsig is the maximum TTL of all RRSIG records.

The old DS record can be removed from the parent zone at the dead time
(Tdea), given by:

    Tdea = Trdy + Iret

At the same time the old, inoperable CSK and all its signatures can be
removed as well.

# Security Considerations

All security considerations of {{RFC9364}} apply to this document.

# IANA Considerations

This document has no IANA actions.

--- back

# Acknowledgments
{:numbered="false"}

The document draws heavily from the work in {{RFC7583}} and we thank
the authors for their work:

* Stephen Morris
* Johan Ihren
* John Dickinson
* W. (Matthijs) Mekking
